Let's talk about chart hooks. Now earlier, we discussed that, besides just installing various
Kubernetes objects to get our app up and running, they can do some extra stuff too. For example,
we can write the charts in such a way that whenever we do a Helm upgrade, a database can
be automatically backed up before the upgrade. So we have a way to restore from backup in case
something goes wrong. Or it could be sending an email alert before an upgrade operation or putting
up a site-wide announcement bar or something and removing it after the upgrade, right.
So these extra actions are implemented with what is known as hooks. Let's look at what those are
in this video. So here's the typical workflow of events in Helm. So when a user installs or
upgrades a Helm chart, using helm install or upgrade command, Helm verifies the files and
templates in the chart, and then renders the manifest files in their final form. And in the
final step installs services on the cluster. So that's what is called as the install or upgrade
phase, where the manifest files are applied on the Kubernetes cluster. Now our requirement is to take
a backup of the database before the chart is actually installed before the upgrade phase.
So we use the pre-upgrade hook. The pre-upgrade hook runs a predefined action, which could really
be anything. In our case, it is to take a backup of the database with a pre-install hook in place.
Helm waits for this action to be completed. And for it to be ready in a ready state before
proceeding to the final phase of installation or upgrading applications on Kubernetes.
Now after the upgrade phase, we'd like to perform some kind of cleanup activity
or send out announcements of some kind. For this, we add a post-upgrade hook.
The post-upgrade hook runs after the install phase is successful,
and performs actions configured, such as sending an email status update of some sorts.
Now apart from the pre-upgrade and post-upgrade hooks, there are pre-install and post-install
hooks that run during the install operations, the pre-delete and post-delete hooks that run
during deletion requests, the pre-rollback and post-rollback hooks that run during rollbacks.
So let's now see how these hooks are configured.
So how do you get something done in Kubernetes, say you have a script to backup the database
called backup.sh. Now how do you get that script executed by Kubernetes? So you develop
the script, and then run it as a pod. Now we know that a pod runs forever. But we only want the
script to be run once. So if you only wanted it to run once, then you create a job instead of a pod.
So it is through Kubernetes objects such as Pods or Jobs that we configure hooks in Helm charts.
So here's a manifest file to create a Job that runs the backup script using an Alpine image.
And this file is placed along with the other templates in the templates directory.
Now we know that all the files in the templates directory are rendered as Kubernetes manifests
files when the chart is installed to deploy the services. But this job shouldn't work like that
it has to be run before the install phase as a pre-install hook and not during the
install or upgrade phase with the rest of the application. It has to be run during the pre
upgrade as part of the pre-upgrade process. So how do we differentiate the chart hook from the
normal template files? How do you tell Helm that this job that we've created is a pre-upgrade hook
and not a usual template? For this we add an annotation. Annotations are a way for us to
add additional metadata to an object which may be used by clients of Kubernetes, in this case Helm,
to store data about that object and perform some kind of actions. So we add an annotation
with the key Helm.sh/hook and the value set to pre-upgrade. This configures this job
as a pre-upgrade hook and Helm no longer considers this file as a regular template file.
Now this job will run before the upgrade step when a chart is upgraded. And similarly,
by changing the setting in this annotation, we can configure a job to be a pre-install hook or
a pre-delete hook, pre-upgrade or pre-rollback hook. And the same goes for the post hooks like
the post-install and post-delete and post-upgrade hooks. So coming back to this example use case,
we have now understood how hooks work and when they are run and how they can be configured.
We can have multiple hooks configured for each step. For example, we can have multiple pre-upgrade
hooks configured. And this could be for performing other activities such as making an external API
call to kick off some automation to, let's say, add a banner on the site and send out an email
announcement. And these may need to be done in some particular order. The email announcement has
to go first, then the site-wide banner has to be displayed and finally the backup to be started.
So how do we define in what order these hooks are to be executed, we can set weights for each hook,
these could be negative or positive numbers. So we set a weight for each job in the order
they should be run. During the chart installation phase Helm sorts these in ascending order
and executes them in that order. So to set a weight for a hook, add the annotation helm.sh
slash hook dash weight, and then set the value as a string. Note that you can set the same weight
for multiple hooks. And if you do so, they will be sorted by resource kind. And finally, by name
in ascending order and then executed that way. Now, what happens after the backup job is completed,
the resource created for the hook, which is in this case is the job resource is going to stay
on as a resource on the cluster, we can configure them to be cleaned up by setting hook deletion
policies. For this, we add the annotation hook delete policy and set a supported value. Now hook
succeeded deletes the resource after the hook is successfully executed. Of course, this means that
if the hook fails to execute, the resources won't be deleted, which might actually be useful,
as maybe we'd want to debug such a failure, see what went wrong. So it's advantageous that
we still have the resource around. Hook failed deletes the resource even if the hook failed
execution. And the default value, if no hook deletion policy is specified, is the last one
that is the before hook creation policy. Now this deletes the previous resource before a new hook is
launched. So the first time this runs, there won't be a resource to be deleted. So it doesn't matter.
But say this pre-upgrade hook creates the backup job object. And the next time we upgrade,
the pre-upgrade hook will delete the old Kubernetes object that was left hanging around after the last
upgrade. And after it deletes the old object, the new object is created and this too is left hanging
around until the next upgrade command is run. So this also helps avoid situations where the hook
would try to create a duplicate object with the same name and Kubernetes might complain that that
object already exists. Well, that's all for now. And I will see you in the next one.